---
title: "On being a woman in tech: some of my experiences"
date: 2011-08-18
tags: drupal-planet, drupal-planet
---
<p>Recently, there has been quite a row about a tweet sent out by the DrupalCon Twitter account. The tweet suggested that people look at the attendees page to reconnect with the attractive developer/designer they met at last year's DrupalCon. A number of people pointed out that this subtly (though inadvertently) promotes a sexually charged environment at the conference.</p><p>For the most part I have stayed out of the discussion, but in catching up on some blog posts last night I saw some troubling reactions, with people being quite callous to the experiences of those who found the tweet off-putting.</p>
<p>I don't usually blog about these kinds of issues, but I wanted to share some of my experiences that I think can help inform the discussion and help people understand some of the sensitivities.</p>
<p>Not all of these experiences are directly related to the tweet at hand, but I do believe the "Drupal isn't immune" section does directly relate and is a very concrete example of how women can sometimes be treated at these events.</p>
READMORE<p>I&#39;m a geek through and through, though a lot of people assume otherwise because of my physical appearance.</p><p>I was using the command line at 4. When my parents got a new Windows computer, I spent the whole summer clicking every single icon. I went to summer school to learn Visual Basic. In high school, I taught myself C++ to get into the college level computer science class. This paid off when I got college credit and could take Advanced OO Programming in Java at Carnegie Mellon <em>for fun</em>.</p><p>Throughout all of those experiences, I found I was underestimated, many times in infuriating ways. On a number of occassions, people said &quot;You&#39;re smarter than you look!&quot; to me as if it were a compliment. And, of course, I found that I was often treated as an &quot;other&quot;, an oddity who&#39;s experience wasn&#39;t worth considering because it didn&#39;t hold for the majority.</p><p>This is the main reason why I shied away from a deeper involvment in computer geekdom... at least, until Drupal.</p><h2>What changed</h2><p>I was working on a Web development team and I could tell that our CMS just wasn&#39;t working for us or our clients. I heard about Drupal and looked for the first easy to grok resource I could find, and luckily stumbled upon the Lullabot podcast.</p><p>I really liked the engaging way that the bots talked about tech topics, but more than that I appreciated the sense of community that they exuded. As I started following more, I realized what strong supporters people like Angie and Eaton (and many others) were of active inclusivity. I realized that this was a community with many people who shared my values and where I could feel reasonably safe that people would listen and care about the things that impact me.</p><h2>But Drupal isn&#39;t immune</h2><p>As much as I would like to say I&#39;ve never, ever dealt with discomforting behavior in the Drupal community, it isn&#39;t true.</p><p>At DrupalCon Chicago, I was in the core conversations room when a man somewhat older than me sat down next to me. I recognized him as a colleague of some of the devs I had been palling around with, but he and I had never met.&nbsp;</p><p>He proceeded to put his arm around my chair. This made me uncomfortable, so I leaned forward so he wouldn&#39;t be touching me. He leaned in from the side so he was touching me again. This continued until I was hanging on to my seat with just the right pocket of my jeans when I thought &quot;This is absurd&quot;, stood up and walked to the back of the room.</p><p>If this had been my first DrupalCon, instead of my 3-4, and if I didn&#39;t have such confidence in the Angies and Eatons and ArianeKs in the community and the fact that they do not condone this behavior, I would not have walked to the back of the room... I would have walked straight out the door and not come back.</p><p>Until now, I didn&#39;t speak up about this experience. I dislike the emotional trauma of reliving these types of uncomfortable situations, having people question whether the other person was really at fault, or whether you were &quot;asking for it&quot; and I didn&#39;t want to be at the eye of a sh**storm, so I brushed it off. I&#39;m lucky to be in a social position in this community where I can brush this off without thinking about it too much. But I know what it feels like not to be in that position.</p><h2>So please consider</h2><p>So please consider when talking about this issue that there are experiences that some of us face that the majority does not.</p><p>I do understand that it has been tough for the people who have faced the criticism. My heart goes out to the person who tweeted it originally because I know he/she had no ill intent, and I&#39;m sure said it from a feeling of fun and community.</p><p>This isn&#39;t the first kerfuffle of this sort. When I got back from DrupalCon Copenhagen, a friend asked me about the one that happened there. I told him that to me the important fact was that we could have open discussions about these issues... the fact that I didn&#39;t feel silenced. By and large, it seemed to me that the community rejected the voices that tried to silence the women who were expressing their concerns.</p><p>I don&#39;t expect perfect behavior from anyone (or my version of perfect), I just expect to be able to openly say &quot;that made me uncomfortable&quot; and have the other person really think about why that&#39;s the case and try to fix it. And I appreciate having a community that supports that.</p><p>Both sides of the discussion need to have compassion for each other. I can definitely see why people are standing in support behind friends and fellow volunteers on this. But please do not belittle the experiences of others while taking that stand.</p><p><aside class="warning"><h2>Unfortunately, no comments</h2><p>As I mentioned above, it feels really bad to have your experiences belittled, and I&#39;ve seen it happen time and time again in comment sections when women talk about their experiences. If this piece resonates with you, I&#39;d be happy to hear in other channels, but please folks, don&#39;t bring the drama in other channels.</p></aside></p><p>&nbsp;</p>